Chronicle The Cantos:Towards a Pedestrian Reading  Pound appears the most crucial case, at least among poets writing in English, of those whose poetry — for those who value it — has to survive a self-evidently and perilously wrong understanding of history, and hence of politics. And yet, as may be seen from the cardinal importance he attaches to a Herodotean term like the peri -plus , Pound can be invoked by poets for whom the natural subjectmatter is topographical rather than historical, or at any rate historical only so far as history is checked against, and embodied in, and qualified by, topography. This indeed is the burden of Pound's own poem, ‘Near Perigord’, which argues that the puzzle of a particular poem by Bernard de Born — a historian's puzzle about the reasons for certain historically recorded vents — is to be solved only by realizing the strategic implications of the location of Born's own fortress of Hautefort. At a time when Pound was principally a student of Provençal poetry, he appears to have been as good as his word, and to have travelled on foot over the terrain in question. This seems to have been, at least in part, the motive behind a walking-tour which Pound took in 1911, of which we learn in chapter 16 of his Guide to Kulchur , written twenty years later: If a man can't afford to go by automobile, and if he is content with eating and architecture, the world's best (as I have known it) is afoot from Poitiers, from Brives, from Perigord or Limoges. In every town a romanesque church or chateau. No place to stay for any time, but food every ten miles or fifteen or twenty. When I say food, I mean food. So, at any rate, was it. With fit track to walk on. This experience is referred to many times in the Cantos: what its author most values in theory, the weighing of syllables in the line and the leading on of the reader's breath from one syllable to the next. As for the case made against the versions in the Classic Anthology — that by using rhyme they align themselves with the closed poetry of print and not with the open poetry of the speaking breath — the obvious retort is that, although in these poems Pound often rhymes, he writes them in free verse, and in a free verse where the syllables are weighed, and the varying pace controlled, as scrupulously as in anything else he has written. The freedom is earned and justified by the poet's acceptance of this responsibility, a responsibility more onerous than any incurred by the writer in regular meter. And the verse is accordingly irregular and gnarled and yet sappy, far more like growing timber than like steel rails. As for the rhyme, these are poems that characteristically celebrate the decorous in private and public life, and the verse must be in keeping; rhyme, when it occurs, is one of several concessions to decorum. But there seems no room for any notion of the decorous in Olson's ‘objectism’, any more than there is room for it in the lawless world of the Cantos , or in Pound himself when he is without a master to translate, whose example makes him surpass himself. When we turn from the Rock-Drill cantos to the Classic Anthology , something is lost but much is gained. And the Classic Anthology shows, therefore, that Williams was in the right when, to close his sour and justifiably contemptuous statement of 1945, he wrote: When they lock the man up with Jim and John and Henry and Mary and Dolores and Grace — I hope they will give him access to books, with paper enough for him to go on making translations for us from the classics such as we have never seen except at his hands in our language. First published by Oxford University Press (New York), 1964. The valley is thick with leaves, with leaves, the trees, The sunlight glitters, glitters a-top Like a fish-scale roof Like the church roof in Poictiers If it were gold. (4/14:18) And a quarter-century later, in the Pisan cantos, when the poet is imprisoned in the American Army detention-camp at Pisa, these are among the memories which come back to him most poignantly. In Canto 74 for instance, there are lines which allude to the Magdalenian cave-paintings discovered at Lascaux and elsewhere in this region of Perigord and Limousin: and at Limoges the young salesman bowed with such french politeness ‘No that is impossible.’ I have forgotten which city But the caverns are less enchanting to the unskilled explorer than the Urochs as shown on the postals, we will see those old roads again, question, possibly but nothing appears much less likely (74/428:455) And in Canto 76, altogether more plangently: But to set here the roads of France, of Cahors, of Chalus, the inn low by the river's edge, the poplars; to set here the roads of France Aubeterre, the quarried stone beyond Poitiers (76/455:482) It seems to have been this last line which caused the editors of the Annotated Index to the Cantos of Ezra Pound to provide one of the few pieces of misinformation in that admirable work. For they give, against ‘Aubeterre’, ‘A church just outside Poitiers, France’. In fact the Aubeterre that Pound means is Aubeterre-sur-Dronne not in Poitou at all but southward, in Perigord. The proof is in the very beautiful early poem, ‘Provincia Deserta’: At Chalais is a pleached arbour; Old pensioners and old protected women Have a right there — it is charity. I have crept over old rafters, peering down Over the Dronne, over a stream full of lilies. Eastward the road lies, Aubeterre is eastward, With a garrulous old man at the inn. I know the roads in that place: Mareuil to the north-east, La Tour, There are three keeps near Mareuil, And an old woman, glad to hear Arnaut, Glad to lend one dry clothing. Anyone who opens before him Carte Michelin No. 75, can see the places named, related just as Pound says: Chalais, on the main line from paris to Bordeaux; Aubeterre in the valley of the Dronne, twelve kilometres to the east; then thirty kilometres north-eastward a little place called La Tour Blanche; and perhaps fifteen kilometres further, just on the edge of the map, Vieux-Mareuil. The Michelin guide to Perigord will reveal a castle either preserved or in ruins at each of these places, though one would need to go off the map to Mareuil-sur-Belle, as well as Vieux-Mareuil, to identify all the three donjons which Pound speaks of in that vicinity. Equally, one needs to have walked these roads oneself if one is to locate ‘the inn low by the river's edge’. That inn is what Pound always remembers of Aubeterre, for instance in Canto 80: and at Ventadour and at Aubeterre or where they set tables down by small rivers, and the stream's edge is lost in grass. (80/509:544) And yet that inn, the Hotel de perigord, being set down by the Dronne, is on the outskirts of Aubeterre. for Aubeterre is a hilltown, set on a chalky cliff above the river (whence the name — Aubeterre, Alba Terra). I suspect that Pound never went further into Aubeterre than this inn, and one needs to have walked in his footsteps from Chalais to Aubeterre to see how he could well have done this, skirting the hill, stopping for perhaps a mid-day meal  in the inn, and then pushing on at once for La Tour Blanche. If he did this, Pound missed a great deal, for Aubeterre is one of the most beautiful and delightfully peaceful places in the whole of old Aquitaine. (In the days of Bertrand de Born, Aquitaine of course was a province of the English crown; Eleanor of Aquitaine, the princess whose marriage to an English King brought this about, is one of the femmes fatales of the Cantos; and Richard Coeur de Lion, trying to make good his claim to all this part of France, was killed at Chalus — a place in this area to which the Cantos refer repeatedly in connection with the King's death.) If Pound in this way did bypass Aubeterre, he missed something after his own heart. For one of the curiosities of Aubeterre is a church in the form of an artificial cave hewn in the face of the chalk cliff. The Michelin Guide to the Côte de l'Atlantique says that this eerie and impressive cavern, which communicates by a passage through the cliff to the château on the summit, was probably made in the twelfth century to shelter the relics of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem brought back from a Crusade by Pierre II of Castillon, who at that time held the château. Now Pound has interested himself a great deal in the order of the Templars, to which Pierre of Castillon belonged. In fact it is the Templars, some of whose ritual survives in the practices of modern Freemasonry, who account for Pound's interest in Poitiers, one of their principal centres. In the thirteenth century the King of france, abetted by a weak Pope, very brutally suppressed the Order of Templars and appropriated their enormous wealth. The Grandmaster of the Order at this time was Jacques de Molay. And that name, Jacques de Molay, is evoked by Yeats in Section VII of his ‘Meditations in Time of Civil War’: ‘Vengeance upon the murderers’, the cry goes up, ‘Vengeance for Jacques Molay’. In cloud-pale rags, or in lace, The rage-driven, rage-tormented, and rage-hungry troop, Trooper belabouring trooper, biting at arm or at face, Plunges towards nothing, arms and fingers spreading wide For the embrace of nothing; and I, my wits astray Because of all that senseless tumult, all but cried For vengeance on the murderers of Jacques Molay. Yeats learned about Jacques de Molay in Thomas Wright's Narratives of Sorcery and Magic (1851). Pound's source, on the other hand, was almost certainly chapter 6 of The Law of Civilization and Decay (1896) by Brooks Adams, Henry Adams's brother. In Canto 90 we read: to the room in Poitiers where one can stand casting no shadow, That is Sagatrieb, that is tradition. Builders had kept the proportion, did Jacques de Molay know these proportions? and was Erigena ours? Mr Noel Stock, who speaks as one who had Pound's confidence in recent years and was in daily contact with him, explains that this passage derives from a hint thrown out by Jessie L. Weston in her from Ritual to Romance , to the effect that the charges of heresy brought against the Templars were not wholly unfounded, since some of the practices of the Eleusinian mystery-cults from the pagan Near East survived in the heart of Christendom in the rituals of the Templars, a survival to be traced in literature in the stories and poems about the quest of the holy grail. From Ritual to Romance came out in 1920, and was a new book when T.S. Eliot borrowed from it for The Waste Land , thus making it permanently famous; Pound could not have known of it in 1911, but if he had then visited the Templars' cavern-church in Aubeterre he could hardly have failed to remember it in the light of jessie Weston's argument. Certainly in recent years Pound's interest in mystery-cults has been more than antiquarian; in ‘was Erigena ours?’ he asks whether the philosopher Scotus Erigena was one of the Eleusinian brotherhood, and ‘ours’can be given full weight — Noel Stock goes so far as to claim (op. cit. p.22) that some of the obscurity of these later Cantos is deliberate and arcane —‘he writes about them as an initiate in words that are both ‘published and not published’…’. Fascinating as this is, it is surely with relief that we return from thus checking printed source against printed source, cross-referring and tentatively identifying, to the open air of ‘the roads of France’. And indeed I would insist on this: the first requirement for a study of Pound is a set of maps (preferably half an inch to the mile) of at any rate certain regions of France, Italy and England; the second requirement is a set of Michelin Green Guides for France and Italy, and (if one is American) similar guides to the South of England. In this, the case of Pound is no different from other writers, or it is different only in degree. Yet, oddly, the only authors for whom we are ready to make this provision nowadays are the Irish ones, Joyce and Yeats. Everyone knows that a Street Directory of Dublin is essential to the reading of joyce. There would be general agreement  that maps of County Sligo and County Galway are essential aids to the study of Yeats. And perhaps most people qualified to judge would concede that there comes a time early in any study of Joyce where the student has to beat the Dublin streets on foot. Similarly no one who has attended the Yeats Summer School in Sligo will deny that the seminars and lectures are less profitable than driving to Glencar, or Gort, and walking in those places, or wandering in the demesne of Lissadell and under the shoulder of Ben Bulben. And yet we are shamefaced about this. It smacks of the Dickensian Society making pilgrimages to Rochester and Dover and Yarmouth; or of ‘poetry-lovers’ haunting Grasmere and Coniston Water. Perhaps it does. But I incline to think that our grandfathers and grandmothers were in the right of it, and that no one can claim to understand Wordsworth who has not been to Hawkshead and Ambleside. The reason why we are embarrassed to admit this is that we have lived in an age when the self-sufficiency, the autonomy of poems has been elevated into dogma. Poems can be self-sufficient, leaning on no reality outside themselves other than the history and usage of the words out of which they are made. But in every age there have been poets who were uninterested in thus cutting their poems free of any but a linguistic reality, poets who are ‘realistic’ and ‘mimetic’in the most straightforward senses of those two complicated words. In our age Pound, far more than Eliot or Yeats, is such a poet. And yet we have seen that the topography of Sligo (to which one should add the topography of at least one part of London, Bedford Park) is illuminating for the reader of Yeats. And who is to say that the topography of the Somerset village of East Coker is unimportant to a reading of Eliot's four Quartets ? And yet how few of us have made that pilgrimage! Chalais and Aubeterre figure at least once in the Cantos that Pound has written more recently. In Canto 101, which was published in the volume Thrones (1960) we read: Finding scarcely anyone save Monsieur de Rémusat who could understand him (junipers, south side) M. Talleyrand spruce and fir take the North Chalais, Aubeterre snow-flakes at a hand's breadth, and rain. Trees line the banks, mostly willows (101/722:75) Here only the place-names refer to france; the junipers, the spruce and fir, and the falling snow are taken over by Pound from a  landscape at the other side of the world. So are ‘the willows’. What is amusing and significant about this latest reference to ‘the roads of france’ is the name of Talleyrand. For Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Perigord, Bonaparte's grand chamberlain, is one of several new heroes who have appeared in the Cantos written since 1945. He appears once or twice in earlier cantos, but not flatteringly; whereas in Canto 105 for instance we are told, by no means persuasively: Talleyrand saved Europe for a century France betrayed Talleyrand; Germany, Bismarck. And Muss saved, rem salvavit, in Spain il salvabile. (105/746:98) (‘Muss’ is Mussolini.) Now, the Talleyrand-Perigords have, as their name implies, been mighty lords in Perigord since the early Middle Ages, and in the early poem ‘Near Perigord’ Talleyrand is one of the powerful and menacing neighbours whom Bertrand de Born has to play off one against another, thus earning (so Pound's poem suggests) the title which Dante gives him in the Inferno , ‘sower of strife’. The château of Chalais has been a stronghold of the Talleyrands from that day to this, and when Pound in recent years read about Napoleon's grand chamberlain, notably in the memoirs of Madame de Rémusat (a principal source for Canto 101), this new association with Chalais re-activated his memories of that place, which accordingly is named afresh, bringing ‘Aubeterre’ with it, but in a quite different tone and spirit from ‘to set here the roads of France’. The trees that ‘line the banks, mostly willows’ are still there, and there are places in the town of Chalais crouched underneath its château, where Pound might still creep over old rafters in search of‘a stream full of lilies’. Pound seems to have misremembered, however, for at Chalais the river is not the Dronne but a smaller stream, the Tude. And although the Tude has plants in its waters, I am reluctant to believe that any of them are lilies; for Chalais has suffered from the twentieth century as Aubeterre has not, and the Tude is polluted whereas the Dronne runs clear. Already in 1915 Pound was making this mistake about the rivers, for in ‘Near Perigord’, which he published in that year, he declares: Chalais is high, a-level with the poplars. Its lowest stones just meet the valley tips Where the low Dronne is filled with water-lilies. A map could have put Pound right, as it can put us right. But no map, nor guide book either, can vindicate for us, ‘Chalais is high, a-level with the poplars’. To confirm this we have to pause and look back from the road to Aubeterre as it climbs the eastern slope of the valley of the Tude, just as Pound must have paused in 1911; and then we see that, whereas the modern town of Chalais is in the river bottom, old Chalais, a manorial village grouped round the gate of the château, does indeed stand on the ridge behind, so that the tops of the tallest poplars by the river wave just below the walls of the château. Some poetry is ‘true’ in just this literal fashion. And in the case of a poet like Pound, who presses upon as as ‘truths’ so many readings of history which in fact are dangerous errors, truths like these are precious. To take one last example, when we read in Canto 101 (and many other places) about ‘Mont Ségur’, the gloss we need is in the Michelin Guide to the pyrenees, where we learn that the Château of Mont Ségur saw the last stand of the Cathars or Albigensians, another heretical movement of the Middle Ages which is mysteriously connected with the quest of the grail. But I feel sure that only by going to St Bertrand de Comminges (another name that crops up in the Cantos), and from there to Mont Ségur, shall we see the point of: ‘at Mont Ségur the chief's cell /you can enter it sideways only’(101:725:77). Place and spirit of place is the inspiration of more poetry than we nowadays like to admit; and to do that poetry justice, the critic needs to turn himself into a tourist. Paideuma I: 1 (Spring-Summer 1972); reprinted in The poet in the Imaginary Museum , ed. Barry Alpert. Manchester: Carcanet New Press, 1977. Six Notes on Ezra Pound Ezra among the Edwardians If I wanted to be pretentious, I might call this paper an investigation of the sociology of literature. It is at any rate a sketch of what might be involved in restoring a writer — in this case, the young Pound — to the highly specific social milieu, that of Edwardian England, in which he moved and on which he impinged. It is thus a contribution to biography, not to criticism. Among Pound's associates in that vanished world, the most instructive figures, I'm inclined to think, are Frederic Manning and Allen Upward; but unfortunately we're still very far from recovering from oblivion the lineaments of either of these men. (Recovering them is a matter of great urgency; and a start has been made, but there's a long way to go — especially with Upward, whom oblivion has enveloped with a completeness that is startling and significant.) Since Manning and Upward are in this way for the moment denied us, I shall make do with two other names: Maurice Hewlett and Laurence Binyon. And Hewlett is the one to start with, probably the best peg on which to hang a necessarily rash characterization of that literary world of late-Edwardian England which Fred Manning entered from Australia, and Pound from the United States. Not that Hewlett was a representative figure, if by that we mean a sort of undistinguished average. On the contrary he was taken to be something of a maverick and flutterer of dovecotes. Or so it appears from the valuable memoirs of Mrs Belloc Lowndes, in chapter nine of her Merry Wives of Westminster : On the whole he had a poor opinion of human nature, and he felt an angry contempt for politicians. Indeed he was apt to take violent prejudices against certain men and women in public life with whom he was not personally acquainted. On many a winter morning I jumped out of bed and put a letter of his in the fire, feeling it would be wrong to allow it to survive; and when some years ago I was asked by a distinguished man of letters if I could help him to write an account of Maurice Hewlett, I rashly said I would send him some of the letters I had received from him. But when I looked over those I had kept, I decided I could not do so. If many of Hewlett's correspondents felt as Mrs Lowndes did, this explains why Hewlett's letters as edited by Laurence Binyon (1925) make such unexciting reading; she herself records that of the three hundred letters printed by Binyon there was only one ‘which I felt to be characteristic of the man I knew so well’. Binyon's volume does however bear out quite touchingly one point that Mrs Lowndes makes: that Hewlett's ambition was to be known as a poet rather than novelist, though it was his historical romances in Wardour Street prose that brought him fame and money. (And some of those romances were set in medieval Aquitaine of the troubadours — which certainly constitutes one common interest that drew Pound and Hewlett together.) Hewlett and Mrs Lowndes moved in the same influential circles. And Pound was not above using his connection with Hewlett so as to get entry to those circles. Thus in a letter to his father of 3 June 1913, all the names are of people who figure in Mrs Lowndes's memoirs: We had a terribly literary dinner on Saturday. Tagore, his son and daughter-in-law, Hewlett, May Sinclair, Prothero (edt. Quarterly Rev .) Evelyn Underhill (author of divers fat books on mysticism),D . and myself. The name to give us pause here is that of G.W. Prothero. For Prothero is the demon-king of the Poundian pantomime, ever since Pound cast him for this role by printing, at the end of his essay on De Gourmont — originally in the Little Review , then in Instigations (1920)— the letter which Prothero wrote him in October 1914: Dear Mr. Pound, Many thanks for your letter of the other day. I am afraid that I must say frankly that I do not think I can open the columns of the Q.R. — at any rate, at present— to any one associated publicly with such a publication as Blast . It stamps a man too disadvantageously. Yours truly, G.W. Prothero Of course, having accepted your paper on the Noh , I could not refrain from publishing it. But other things would be in a different category. And Pound understandably gets all the mileage possible out of the ill-starred history of ‘QR ’: I need scarcely say that The Quarterly Review is one of the most profitable periodicals in England, and one of one's best ‘connections’, or sources of income. It has, of course, a tradition. ‘It is not that Mr. Keats (if that be his real name, for we almost doubt that any man in his senses would put his real name to such a rhapsody)’— wrote their Gifford of Keats' Endymion . My only comment is that the Quarterly has done it again. Their Mr. A. Waugh is a lineal descendant of Gifford, by the way of mentality. A century has not taught them manners. In the eighteen-forties they were still defending the review of Keats. And more recently Waugh has lifted up his senile slobber against Mr. Eliot. It is indeed time that the functions of both English and American literature were taken over by younger and better men. As for their laying the birch on my pocket, I compute that my support of Lewis and Brzeska has cost me at the lowest estimate about £20 per year, from one source alone since that regrettable occurrence, since I dared to discern a great sculptor and a great painter in the midst of England's artistic desolaton. (‘European and Asiatic papers please copy.’) Waugh's ‘senile slobber’ against Eliot — he as good as called Eliot ‘a drunken helot’— has been remarked on several times, notably in his son Evelyn's autobiography,A Little Learning . Prothero the demon-king has never bounded on to the stage more sulphurously than in Hugh Kenner's The Pound Era : Abstract and remote though the contents of Blast might be, the establishment had bared its fangs and invoked its ultimate weapon, the boycott. To men who lived on what they could pick up from articles and reviews, the ultimate weapon implied more than lack of a showcase: it implied starvation… . Prothero was snarling like a guilty thing surprised. Of what was he guilty? Of reverence for death, or perhaps decorum… . The long-term psychic damage Pound underwent is beyond calculation. On the continent men were soon killing each other. A third of a million Frenchmen died in the first five months… Hugh Kenner doesn't need to be told how much I admire The Pound Era . Accordingly I ought to be able to say that at this stage his comments seem to me beside the point, or more exactly in excess of it. What with all this baring of fangs and of ultimate weapons, these snarlings and ‘long-term psychic damage’, how is one to protest mildly that Prothero is — with an engagingly archaic elegance (‘stamps a man too disadvantageously’)— telling Pound that he needn't waste his time submitting manuscripts to the Quarterly Review for the time being? Would it have been more honourable for Prothero to let Pound go on submitting, when there was no hope of his being accepted? It helps, I think, to take note of Conrad Aiken on ‘Ezra Pound: 1914’(Ezra Pound: Perspectives , ed. Stock, 1965): But it was typical of Pound's kindness, even to a potential enemy or rival, that he should have so persisted in trying to give me the right contacts. Contacts: yes, these, as I was to discover, were of prime importance: they were part of the game . And for Pound it was a game, a super-chess game, and not without its Machiavellian elements. For example, this was the summer of the famous Blast dinner for the Vorticists, in which Wyndham Lewis was of course much involved. Pound sent me a card, which I still have, naming place and date, and saying, rather peremptorily, ‘I think you had better take this in.’ This put my back up. I had no intention then, or ever after, of joining any group or ‘movement’ and I therefore sidestepped the Vorticists just as I sidestepped both the Imagists and the Amygists. I didn't attend the dinner, for which in a way I'm now sorry, and Pound never forgot or forgave. Nineteen years later, in an angry letter from Italy about some review I'd written which began: ‘Jesus Gawd Aiken, you poor blithering ass’ he concluded by saying: ‘I've never forgotten that you wouldn't go to the Blast dinner.’ It was a game, which Pound had played trickily and with zest When he joined in with Blast , he miscalculated and overplayed his hand. And just that, nothing more, is what Prothero is telling him. If the game was for high stakes, if Pound's livelihood was at stake, the more reason for playing the game circumspectly. He didn't; and he paid the price. What is there in this to evoke the shades of a third of a million dead Frenchmen? Or to make a Lucifer figure out of G.W. Prothero? It could be argued that Blast was a miscalculation all round, even for Wyndham Lewis. Certainly it was for Pound. And Violet Hunt, loyally selling copies at half-price in her drawing room, confesses in her memoir I Have This to Say that she was at a loss to explain why the damned were damned, and the blest were blest. Among the  blest, ‘Lady Aberconway was put in to please me’, and ‘Madame Strindberg, who ran the Club of the Golden Calf for the sake of the set, could hardly escape a favourable mention.…’ But ‘Mrs Belloc Lowndes felt, I am sure, that she needed no blessings from anyone but her Church’. On the other hand, among those blasted, if one understood well enough about ‘Rabindranath Tagore, from whose recitations ad infinitum we all suffered a great deal about this time’, why pick on Thomas Beecham, who at this time with the backing of Lady Cunard was embarking on a lifelong crusade for English opera? Hugh Kenner veers unexpectedly into the idiom of the British schoolboy: ‘Blast should have been a great lark’. But even a schoolboy's jape is supposed to have some ascertainable point; and Blast had none. As for Hewlett, how far he knew that he was being ‘used’ by Pound is what at this point no one can determine. I'd guess that he knew, and didn't resent it. For ‘the game’ was one that everyone played, and that was all right so long as you took your losses without squealing. In any case it didn't preclude, on Pound's part, genuine affection. As we see from Canto 74: Lordly men are to earth o'ergiven these the companions: Fordie that wrote of giants and William who dreamed of nobility and Jim the comedian singing: ‘Blarney castle me darlin' you're nothing now but a stOWne’ and Plarr talking of mathematics or Jepson lover of jade Maurie who wrote historical novels and Newbolt who looked twice bathed are to earth o'ergiven. (432:459) Later in the Pisan Cantos (80/515:550) we read of ‘that Christmas at Maurie Hewlett's’— Christmas 1911 in Hewlett's fifteenth-century house outside Salisbury — to which Pound was driven from Southampton across a tract of Hardy's Wessex which his imagination peopled with phantoms out of Under the Greenwood Tree . Henry Newbolt was at this time Hewlett's neighbour in Wiltshire, and it seems to have been at this Christmas time that Hewlett took Pound to see Newbolt, who figures elsewhere in Canto 80: ‘He stood’, wrote Mr Newbolt, later Sir Henry, ‘the door behind’ and now they complain of cummings. (507:541) But the Pisan ordeal had shocked Pound into recovering a compassion and tenderness which we look for mostly in vain in the Pound of the years preceding. And in the 1930s he had been unforgiving towards these friends of his youth. In 1939, for instance, in an obituary of Ford for The Nineteenth Century and After , he had written of ‘the stilted language that then passed for ‘good English’ in the arthritic milieu that held control of the respected British critical circles, Newbolt, the backwash of Lionel Johnson, Fred Manning, the Quarterlies and the rest of ‘em’. And this echoed a letter of 1937 to Michael Roberts, extolling Ford and saying, ‘The old crusted lice and advocates of corpse language knew that The English Review existed’. In Ezra Pound: The Image and the Real , Herbert Schneidau reasonably enough names three of the ‘crusted lice’ as Henry Newbolt, Frederic Manning, and G.W. Prothero, and with a proper scrupulousness he notes that all these ‘were treated with great deference in Pound's early letters and writings’. Schneidau follows Pound's own broad hints by tracing his gradual alienation or liberation from these early admirations according as Ford's demands for a prosaic strength in verse writing gradually won Pound over from the Wardour Street language of his own early poems (such as‘Canzone: The Yearly Slain', written in reply to Manning's ‘Korè’). The story is an intricate one, as Herbert Schneidau acknowledges; and Pound's holding out against Ford for the Dantesque principle of a ‘curial’ diction (see his introduction to the poems of Lionel Johnson) represents to my mind an objection that can still be raised to Ford's principles of diction, salutary as Ford's polemics undoubtedly were for Pound at this time. Moreover Prothero, a historian, perhaps had no ideas about poetic diction one way or the other; Pound, as we have seen, thought himself victimized by Prothero not for anything to do with writing but for having championed Lewis the painter and Gaudier the sculptor. All the same Schneidau's argument is just and illuminating, so far as it goes. But does it go far enough? It is worth looking again at Pound's letter to Michael Roberts, strident though it is. Pound there, it is plain — for instance, in his comment on Hilaire Belloc — is as unwilling as any Marxist to abstract a question like the proper language for poetry from the whole social matrix and milieu in which such a subject may get itself debated. Pound speaks of the ‘order of a pewked society’. And indeed it is, for us too, evasive and misleading to abstract the manageably limited issue from the larger one. For instance, nothing is more likely than that Prothero, when he said that association with Blast ‘stamped a man too disadvantageously’, had in mind among other things Ford's connection with the magazine  and the scandal of Ford's relations with Violet Hunt — a scandal that had already made a breach between Violet Hunt and the cruelly timorous Henry James, as told painfully in I Have This to Say . This is where Mrs Belloc Lowndes is so illuminating. She writes well, though carelessly. And in The Merry Wives of Westminster , knowing just what she is doing, she recreates a world as exotic as that of the Andaman Islanders: the world of cultured Edwardian London. I am not concerned to defend that world; I am merely trying to understand it, and the rules by which it lived. Some features of that world are nowadays entirely inscrutable — notably, what it was in Frederic Lowndes's self-effacing position on The Times which gave him and his wife access to a society of international aristocracy and even royalty, and to the inner circles of the cabinet, as well as the society of novelists and playwrights. What is clear is that this was all one society, in which the wives — like Mrs Lowndes herself — wrote books or maintained salons, while their husbands were functionaries, some of them much in the public eye as ministers of the Crown, others — like Frederic Lowndes — no less influential and esteemed for operating under wraps, as grey eminences. Barrie and Arnold Bennett, Hewlett and Henry James, were free of this society whenever they chose. It was ‘the establishment’, or one very thick and influential layer of it; but it certainly was not made up of stuffed shirts and Colonel Blimps along with their twittering wives. Indeed, if we can suppress the automatic ‘liberal’ prejudice which indexes ‘Newbolt, Sir Henry (1862–1938)’as ‘English imperialist poet’(in Ezra Pound. Penguin Critical Anthology , ed. Sullivan), we have to acknowledge that it was in many ways an attractive society, and an admirable one. That we are dealing with a privileged élite goes without saying; as also that it depended on the institution of domestic service. But there appears not to have been, for instance, any of that sterile rivalry between man and wife which is now the bane of middle-class society with any claims to cultural or intellectual interests; plainly Mrs Lowndes and the young matrons who were her friends did not seethe resentfully at having their intellectual and imaginative capacities shackled to kitchen and nursery, whereas their husbands could exercise theirs in the great world. Moreover — and more to the point — if as literary intellectuals we feel frustrated at having no channel of access to the figures who exercise decision-making power in our societies, Mrs Lowndes shows us a society in which literary intelligence had direct access to such centres of power, by way of the conjugal bed as well as over the dinner table. Pound — thanks to Hewlett probably more than anyone else — had, at the time of his dinner party for Hewlett and Prothero and the rest, the chance of moving into that society. His espousal of Blast closed to him just  those doors that were on the point of opening; and twenty years later, when he desperately wanted such access to the power-wielding centres of society, he was condemned to the world of fantasy in which he thought he could influence United States policy by way of such unlikely intermediaries as Senators Borah and Bankhead, and Italian policy by way of Ubaldo degli Uberti. (This is not to say that Pound's decision was wrong. For Eliot, who chose the other way, earned entry into nothing more seriously influential than the circles of Bloomsbury, where the Edwardian pattern survived only in an attenuated and largely illusory version.) If we ask what it was about this society which made Pound and also Lewis affront it more or less deliberately, to ensure that its doors were closed to them, I think only one answer is possible: it was ineradicably vowed to the idea of the artist as the amateur. It is true that Arnold Bennett, for one, refused to conform to that stereotype; and doubtless one could find other exceptions. But it is plain than in Mrs Lowndes's society, writing, for instance, was conceived of as typically a spare-time activity. It could not be otherwise if literary intelligence was to make itself available in drawing-rooms to administrative and political decision making. That English tradition of the amateur is of course a long one, and by no means ignoble, reaching back as it does through John Morley to Walter Bagehot, to Burke, to Addison, and so all the way to Philip Sidney and the Renaissance all-round man. But both Pound and Lewis were American or Americanized enough to have on the contrary a professional attitude to their respective arts, in the quite precise sense that they saw the continuity of art traditions ensured by the atelier , the master instructing his prentices. The renegade or maverick Englishmen with whom they allied themselves — Ford, and at another level A.R. Orage — shared this un-English conviction and habit. And this difference between them and such initially sympathetic Englishmen as Hewlett and Newbolt went very deep; for ultimately it meant that, when the question arose whether the artist's first responsibility was to his art (his trade ) or to his society, Pound and Lewis and Ford would opt for the first alternative, Hewlett and Newbolt for the second — as indeed we soon see them doing when both of them answer the call of First World War patriotism by writing moralebuilding poems and stories. It is not hard to see that in Homage to Sextus Propertius Pound is centrally concerned with just this question, and is defending his own scale of priorities against Hewlett's or Newbolt's. Something had certainly gone wrong — gone soft and mawkish — with the English tradition of the amateur, when we find Hewlett on facing pages of Binyon's volume of Letters , writing in 1916 to  E.V. Lucas, ‘My Dear Lad, That will be jolly indeed’, and to J.C. Squire, ‘Dear Squire, I am very glad to have your quire of poetry…which is in jolly type and on jolly paper….’ It is not thus, one cannot help feeling, that the serious artist addresses a fellow practitioner. And even before the War, though Hewlett in correspondence with Harold Monro and Newbolt could give and take hard knocks by way of semi-technical criticism, yet it is enveloped and emasculated by similarly anxious camaraderie. Still, Newbolt at any rate was able to understand something of what was at stake. In his ‘A Study of English poetry’, which ran in The English Review from March to June 1912, Newbolt refers to Pound as ‘a critic, who is himself a poet, and whom I always read with great interest’. Those who think of Pound as a great liberator from stiff and hidebound conventions will be disconcerted to find that Newbolt on the contrary treats him as an academic formalist. Newbolt says: The vast majority of what are generally called well-educated persons in this country have, in the very process of their education, been impressed with the belief that metre is an arrangement of language which can be judged by the application of a mechanical test, and that the poet who produces a line which does not answer to the test is a fit subject for correction by any critic who can point out the discrepancy. It is true that we are more enlightened than we were; there is a public which has learnt to smile at the reviewer who declares that a line ‘will not scan’, or that it contains a ‘trochee’ where it should have had an ‘iamb’, without considering whether it was ever intended to ‘scan’, or whether there is anything in English verse which can be treated as the absolute equivalent of a Greek or Latin trochee. But…the fallacy does appear, in much subtler forms. In the Poetry Review for February, 1912, a critic, who is himself a poet, and whom I always read with great interest, speaks of the struggle ‘to find out what has been done, once and for all, better than it can ever be done again, and to find out what remains for us to do’…. But if every work of art is simply the expression of the artist's intuition, it is evident that an absolute or complete pattern would be useless, since the intuitions of two different minds could never be expressed by the same form: nor can anything in art be said to have been ‘done once for all’, since if it were ‘done again’ by another hand — used, that is, to express the intuition of another spirit — it would be no longer what had been done before. Newbolt's attitude is still very common — not only among the British  (especially those who have come under the influence of F. R. Leavis), but also among American free versifiers who think they are an avantgarde and who are muddled enough to think that they have Pound's authority to back them. Whether they know it or not, they are in fact endorsing Henry Newbolt against Pound! All the same, there is by and large a crucial difference here between British and American attitudes, and one that is today every bit as marked as it was in 1912. For on nearly every American campus there is an atelier in the shape of a ‘Creative Writing programme’, whereas on no British campus is there any such thing, and indeed the British scoff at the mere possibility — on precisely the grounds that Newbolt here puts forward. Pound's exasperated bewilderment before the spectacle of British loyalty to the amateur, and British readiness to pay the price in tolerance of the amateurish, is nowhere so evident as in his lifelong esteem for Laurence Binyon, the editor of the Hewlett Letters . According to Noel Stock's Life , Pound first met Binyon in the second week of February 1909, and early in March he found ‘intensely interesting’ a lecture by Binyon on European and Oriental art, for which the lecturer had sent him a ticket. Some time that year there occurred a famous meeting at the Vienna Café, in New Oxford Street near the British Museum, when Pound as Binyon's ‘bulldog’ met Wyndham Lewis as the ‘bulldog’of T. Sturge Moore. This, nearly forty years later, was celebrated in Canto 80: Mr Lewis had been to Spain Mr Binyon's young prodigies pronounced the word: Penthesilea There were mysterious figures that emerged from recondite recesses and ate at the WIENER CAFE which died into banking, Jozefff may have followed his emperor. ‘It is the sons pent up within a man’, mumbled old Neptune ‘Laomedon, Ahi, Laomedon’ or rather three ‘ahis’ before the ‘Laomedon’ ‘He stood’ wrote Mr Newbolt, later Sir Henry, ‘the door behind’ and now they complain of cummings. So it is to Mr Binyon that I owe, initially, Mr Lewis, Mr P. Wyndham Lewis. His bull-dog, me, as it were against old Sturge M's bull-dog, Mr T. Sturge Moore's bull-dog, et meum est propositum, it is my intention in tabernam, or was, to the Wiener cafe you cannot yet buy one dish of Chinese food in all Italy hence the debacle ‘forloyn’ said Mr Bridges (Robert) ‘we'll get ‘em all back’ meaning archaic words…. (506:540) For ‘prodigies’(‘Mr Binyon's young prodigies’) surely we ought to read ‘protégés’; and then it becomes possible to wonder whether the jocularity about bulldogs doesn't mark a wistful or resentful sense that Binyon and Sturge Moore (‘old Neptune’) might have done more with their respective protégés than merely set them to sniff and snarl at each other 's heels; to question whether the two senior writers could not have established themselves — at least for some purposes — as masters of ateliers in which the two young hopefuls might have enrolled as apprentices. Instead, the outcome of what seems to have been an uncomfortable occasion was merely that Pound and Lewis took that much longer to find out that they were natural allies. It was probably on this occasion that Binyon said something that Pound, misdating the event 1908, recalled in the postscript to a letter to Binyon in 1934: I wonder if you are using (in lectures) a statement I remember you making in talk, but not so far as I can recall, in print. ‘Slowness is beauty’, which struck me as very odd in 1908 (when I certainly did not believe it) and has stayed with me ever since — shall we say as proof that you violated British habit; and thought of it. Who thought of it? Binyon, or Pound? Hugh Kenner is no doubt right to suppose that it was Pound who had been thinking of it. For it crops up in the Rock-Drill Canto 87, in the 1950s: Only sequoias are slow enough. BinBin ‘is beauty.’ ‘Slowness is beauty.’ (572:608) The mingled exasperation and admiration that Pound felt for  Binyon are nowhere so explicit and appealing as in what he wrote for Blast (July, 1915), so as to introduce into that inappropriately vociferous context nine quotations from the demure prose of Binyon's The Flight of the Dragon. An Essay on the Theory and Practice of Art in China and Japan (London, 1911): We regret that we cannot entitle this article ‘Homage to Mr Lawrence (sic) Binyon,’ for Mr Binyon has not sufficiently rebelled. Manifestly he is not one of the ignorant. He is far from being one of the outer world, but in reading his work we constantly feel the influence upon him of his reading of the worst English poets. We find him in a disgusting attitude of respect towards predecessors whose intellect is vastly inferior to his own. This is loathesome (sic). Mr Binyon has thought; he has plunged into the knowledge of the East and extended the borders of occidental knowledge, and yet his mind constantly harks back to some folly of nineteenth century Europe. We can see him as it were constantly restraining his inventiveness, constantly trying to conform to an orthodox view against which his thoughts and emotions rebel, constantly trying to justify Chinese intelligence by dragging it a little nearer to some Western precedent. Ah well Mr Binyon has, indubitably, his moments. Very few men do have any moments whatever, and for the benefit of such readers as have not sufficiently respected Mr Binyon for his, it would be well to set forth a few of them. They are found in his ‘flight of the Dragon’, a book otherwise unpleasantly marred by his recurrent respect for inferior, very inferior people. It isn't hard to see here, once again, Pound's baffled exasperation that, instead of setting up shop as maître d'école , ‘the very learned British Museum assistant’ should resolutely duck back into doing such a worthy and humane but undoubtedly over-modest activity as editing such of the letters of his old friend Hewlett as could not conceivably give offence. Yet Binyon knew the unformulated rules of the society that he moved in, and played the game consistently as the amateur that that society required him to be. It is true to this day in England that, if one has learning, one must wear it so lightly that it is unnoticeable. It would be tedious to quote and consider every one of the tributes that Pound paid to Binyon. One is at the end of Gaudier-Brzeska (1916); another is in a Criterion article of 1937, ‘D'Artagnan Twenty Years After’; in that year appeared Polite Essays , which includes Pound's review of Binyon's translation of the Inferno (originally  in The Criterion for April 1934); there are two tributes to Binyon in Guide to Kulchur (1938); in 1948 at St Elizabeth's Pound was still pressing Binyon on the attention of Charles Olson; and as late as 1958 he took the opportunity of Pavannes and Divagations to get back into print his appreciative note on The Flight of the Dragon . None of these items is without interest. But ‘Hell’, the review of Binyon's Inferno , is particularly important; for it may well be one of the most careful and illuminating acts of criticism that Pound ever performed. It includes this passage: I do not expect to see another version as good as Binyon's… Few men of Binyon's position and experience have tried or will try the experiment. You cannot counterfeit forty years' honest work, or get the same result by being a clever young man who prefers vanilla to orange or heliotrope to lavender perfume. ‘La sculpture n'est pas pour les jeunes hommes.’ (Brancusi) A younger generation, or at least a younger American generation, has been brought up on a list of acid tests, invented to get rid of the boiled oatmeal consistency of the bad verse of 1900, and there is no doubt that many young readers seeing Binyon's inversions, etc., will be likely to throw down the translation under the impression that it is incompetent. The fact that this idiom, which was never spoken on sea or land, is NOT fit for use in the new poetry of 1933–4 does not mean that it is unfit for use in a translation of a poem finished in 1321. Pound may be right or wrong about the merits of Binyon's version, as about the sorts of language that are acceptable in verse translation; what is certain is that he's here applying to diction a sort of sliding scale or set of variable standards such as Ford's principles didn't allow for. At any rate, Pound's enthusiasm for Binyon's version had led him to re-open correspondence with Binyon. And a letter of 30 August 1934 is particularly interesting, since it is rather plainly a reply to protests from Binyon about Pound's contemptuous treatment of Rubens. Pound's humility under Binyon's supposed rebuke is very striking: Dear L.B: When one has finally done the job and found the mot juste , I dare say violent language usually disappears. Rubens' technique (at least in one painting about 4 ft. square) is not stupid. I dare say I damned him, for the whole grovelling imbecility of french court life from the death of Francois premier to the last fat slob that was guillotined. …And my use of ‘idiotic’ is loose. You are quite right about that. Have always been interested in intelligence, escaped the germy epoch of Freud and am so bored with all lacks of intelletto that I haven't used any discrimination when I have referred to ‘em…. If, as I'm inclined to believe, this unwonted willingness to kiss the rod represents one last offer by Pound (at this time, aged forty-eight!) to enrol in Binyon's seminar if Binyon would only call it into being, Binyon once again knew better than to understand what Pound was driving at. Oddly enough, the last word — though a mournful one — can be with Maurice Hewlett. For in 1920, when Binyon began work towards his version of the Inferno , he exchanged letters with Hewlett, who had translated the first canto years before, and now urged Binyon to shorten his measure to tetrameters, pointing out that this was what he himself had done in his ‘Song of the Plough’, a long poem in terza rima in which he had invested a great deal. Hewlett remarked: ‘Another thing: putting in eights compels the terseness of Dante, wh. amounts sometimes to a vice in him. Still, there it is, and you must reproduce it’. How could Binyon have failed to remember this, when Pound complimented him by saying, ‘He has carefully preserved all the faults of his original’? In Guide to Kulchur (chapter 30) Pound was to say, again with Binyon's translation specifically in mind, ‘Honest work has its reward in the arts if no other where’. How one would like that to be true! But turning over the pages of poor Hewlett's unreadable but honest ‘Song of the Plough’, one wonders about that. One does indeed. Paideuma 5: 1 (1976). Ezra Pound Abandons the English Ezra Pound's long love affair with England, and his angry and wounded turning against her in 1917 or 1918, cannot of course bulk so large in an American's sense of him as in an Englishman's. It is an American, Herbert Schniedau, who has asked: Can any man who identifies himself with the British world of letters, however independent and tolerant he may be, write a fair-minded book about Pound? What Pound did to English literature and British sensibilities doesn't seem forgivable, and I really think that the English were more offended by Pound's political obsessions than were the countrymen he ostensibly betrayed. This is fair comment; and the last clause in particular is, surprisingly, manifestly true, explain it how we may. And yet an Englishman's relation to English culture and its traditions may be more tormented than Schniedau allows for, especially if the Englishman in question defines himself as, or aspires to be, an English artist . Such a one may feel that Pound's ‘writing off’ of England, his abandonment of her — physically in 1920, in imagination some years earlier — was abundantly justified, to the extent indeed that it was not so much his justified rejection of her, as her unjustifiable rejection of him . And yet such an Englishman must wonder: Was there once virtue in England, which subsequently went out of her? If so, when did this happen? In the casualty lists from the Battle of the Somme? (Or is that merely rhetoric?) And can the virtue that thus went out of the spiritual reality called England ever be restored? Has there been such a restoration, since 1920? If so, when did it happen? And if not, when will it ever happen? When, and how? These are serious and painful questions. At all events there are Englishmen who find them so. To take one example out of many, the native Englishman D. H. Lawrence reached just the same conclusion  as Pound at just the same time, and Lawrence's letters record it; he concluded, just as Pound did, that England after the First World War was, for the artist, uninhabitable. The names of Robert Graves, W.H. Auden, and Christopher Isherwood may serve to remind us of English writers who seem to have reached the same dismaying conclusion over the years since. However that may be, there are reasons for thinking that the abandonment of England, and of any hopes for her, was not much less momentous for Pound than it is for his English readers. After all, Pound had married England — not figuratively, but literally, in the person of Dorothy Shakespear; and Ben Hecht in 1918 reported that Pound was ‘a doting monogamist’. It didn't last; his alienation from England seems to have coincided with an alienation from Dorothy, for within five years he had a child by Olga Rudge. And this is not altogether surprising; for Dorothy Pound seems to have been English in a singularly entire and uncompromising fashion. The daughter of Olivia Shakespear, who had been briefly Yeats's mistress and had bought Wyndham Lewis's canvases and Gaudier's drawings, Dorothy told Hugh Kenner in 1965, ‘I read poetry only with difficulty. I never did much care for it’. She said also, recalling Pound translating Noh plays on their honeymoon at Stone Cottage in Sussex, ‘I was not then preoccupied with plays and characters. I was trying to make out what sort of creature I was going to be living with’. Moreover, Dorothy's Englishness was centuries old: among her cousins was one Charles Talbot —‘one of the Shakespear names’, she said — who owned a medieval abbey, ‘and once Ezra and I crawled over the roof in a turret to see a copy of the Magna Charta, kept there in a glass case’. In 1945, in an American prison camp near pisa, Pound remembered that (Canto 80): To watch a while from the tower where dead flies lie thick over the old charter forgotten, oh quite forgotten but confirming John's first one, and still there if you climb over attic rafters; to look at the fields; are they tilled? is the old terrace live as it might be with a whole colony if money be free again? Chesterton's England of has-been and why-not, or is it all rust, ruin, death duties and mortgages and the great carriage yard empty and more pictures gone to pay taxes When a dog is tall but not so tall as all that that dog is a Talbot (a bit long in the pasterns?) When a butt is ½ as tall as a whole butt That butt is a small butt Let backe and side go bare and the old kitchen left as the monks had left it and the rest as time has cleft it. (Only shadows enter my tent as men pass between me and the sunset)… If, as Hugh Kenner believes, Pound never ceased to love Dorothy even while he loved Olga, this is surely part of what he loved in her, an aspect of what she meant to him; and so Pound's feelings for and about England were, right to the end, not much less tormented than any English reader's can be. And the English reader who does not understand that the punning on ‘Talbot’ is painful and all but hysterical, like the punning of Shakespeare's Hamlet, does not understand Pound at all. As for Dorothy's loyalty, it proved equal to any occasion; and in particular through the years of Pound's incarceration in St Elizabeth's her devotion was exemplary. Certainly she was no philistine, but a graphic artist herself. And yet… ‘I read poetry only with great difficulty. I never did much care for it’. It is at any rate possible that in her a certain ethical rightness and decency coexisted with aesthetic stiffness and suspicion. It was a not uncommon combination in a certain breed of Englishman and Englishwoman — a breed perhaps now vanished, which is not to say, improved upon. As for Canto 80, it continues, and closes upon, ‘the matter of England: beyond the castern barbed wire a sow with mine boneen matronly as any duchess at Claridge's and for that Christmas at Maurie Hewlett's Going out from Southampton they passed the car by the dozen who would not have shown weight on a scale riding, riding for Noel the green holly Noel, Noel, the green holly A dark night for the holly That would have been Salisbury plain, and I have not thought of the Lady Anne for this twelve years Nor of Le Portel How tiny the panelled room where they stabbed him In her lap, almost, La Stuarda Si tuit li dolh ehl planh el marrimen for the leopards and broom plants Tudor indeed is gone and every rose, Blood-red, blanch-white that in the sunset glows Cries: ‘Blood, Blood, Blood!’ against the gothic stone Of England, as the Howard or Boleyn knows. Nor seeks the carmine petal to infer; Nor is the white bud Time's inquisitor Probing to know if its new-gnarled root Twists from York's head or belly of Lancaster; Or if a rational soul should stir, perchance, Within the stem or summer shoot to advance Contrition's utmost throw, seeking in thee But oblivion, not thy forgiveness, FRANCE. as the young lizard extends his leopard spots along the grass-blade seeking the green midge half an ant-size and the Serpentine will look just the same and the gulls be as neat on the pond and the sunken garden unchanged and God knows what else is left of our London my London, your London and if her green elegance remains on this side of my rain ditch puss lizard will lunch on some other T-bone sunset grand couturier. ‘That Christmas’(not that it matters) was Christmas 1911, which Pound spent as a guest of Maurice Hewlett's at the Old Rectory, Broad Chalke, Salisbury — a house which had once been a nunnery, dating back to 1487. Hewlett, author of The Queen's Quair , brings to mind another writer who had similarly concerned himself with Mary Queen of Scots (‘La Stuarda’)— that is to say, Swinburne in his Mary Stuart . Swinburne is alluded to, here as elsewhere, by the place-name ‘Le Portel’, where — so Pound seems to have believed (wrongly, for the name is ‘Yport’)— Swinburne on a famous occasion was saved from drowning by French fishermen. At Holyrood House in Edinburgh one is still shown the room where Rizzio was stabbed ‘in her lap almost’. The line in Provençal is from Bertran de Born's ‘Planh for the Young English King’, which Pound had translated splendidly as early as 1909. The ‘leopards and broom plants’, Plantagenet emblems, signify the dynastic reasons for which Henry the young king was killed, as were Rizzio and Mary's husband Darnley centuries later. Anyone is free to decide that life is too short for such unriddlings; others (I speak from experience) may develop a taste for them. A more important point is that passages of this sort, spliced as they are with images like the lizard from the immediate foreground of Pound's tent inside the wire-mesh cage of the prison camp, do not come into being out of the free associations of idle reverie, though in these Pisan cantos Pound exploits the illusion of that, as Joyce did in Ulysses when he pretended to transport himself and us into the mind of Leopold Bloom. The reason we are reminded of these historical episodes, rather than any of a hundred others, comes clear only with the surprising and congested line that closes the quatrains about the Wars of the Roses: ‘But oblivion, not thy forgiveness, FRANCE’. The England that Pound mourns the loss of is, as it had been for him from the first, an integral province of western Europe, sharing a common culture with France and always reaching out, through France, to the shores of the Mediterranean. This emphasis will not commend itself to the English reader whom Herbert Schniedau envisages. Such a reader is likely to define his Englishness as precisely that which continental Europe is not. And in fact, of recent years Dickens's Mr Podsnap has walked again, cherishing insularity as a patriotic duty. But of course there are other things in this passage which will put English teeth on edge. Colonel Blimp today is likely to be a Roundhead colonel, in his professed sentiments a Leveller, though not of course in his practices. And his egalitarianism will be offended by ‘the great carriage yard empty’, and by ‘more pictures gone to pay taxes’. Especially as voiced by an  American who had disloyally taken the wrong side in a war just successfully completed ‘for democracy’, the sentiments must have seemed — in 1948, when The Pisan Cantos appeared — nothing short of shameless! An English writer who went into self-exile just when Pound and Lawrence did, Ford Madox Ford, had always been denied serious consideration (as he is denied it still), in part for having, in No More Parades at the end of a previous war, envisaged the England he was leaving in just such manorial terms: and if the Englishman could not be forgiven, how forgive the American? (Lawrence, it is true, envisaged the England he was relinquishing very largely in the image of Garsington Manor; but then, Lawrence's origins are so impeccably proletarian that the aberration can be overlooked!) And then there is the insolence of the last line: ‘sunset grand couturier’. Isn't that the giveaway? It will certainly seem so to the Englishman (as I take him to be), who found in the ‘Envoi’ to Hugh Selwyn Mauberley — Pound's most explicit farewell to England, as he prepared to leave her in 1918 —‘externality: an externality which, considering what Mauberley attempts, is utterly disabling’. This is the same reader who, having decided that the ‘Envoi’ is ‘literary , in a limiting sense’, is provoked by the word ‘magic’in the middle stanza into deciding that ‘the term ‘literary’becomes a good deal more limiting, for the term ‘aesthetic’rises to our lips, and so, perhaps, does ‘American’' And there we have it! For this sort of Englishman, ‘externality,— to things English — is what any American is condemned to; and per contra ‘inwardness’— with things English — is what an Englishman quite simply has, painlessly, as a birthright. From this point of view, the only good American is one who stays shamefacedly mute about his English cousins, however many years he may have lived among them. The same rule does not hold, it will be noticed, when there is any question of Englishmen talking about Americans. The comment I have been quoting from appeared in 1965. 